---
layout: post
title: "C++ interview questions and answers"
date: 2020-12-10
tags: "Interview C++"
---

# General C++

## List the types of inheritance supported in C++.

- Single inheritance
- Multiple inheritance
- Hierarchial inheritance
- Multilevel inheritance
- Hybrid inheritance

## Explain Encapsulation, abstraction and inheritance.

## Explain the purpose of the keyword volatile and extern.

- `volatile` -> the compiler should not do any optimization on the `volatile` variable, for example, it will never be stored in cache.

- `extern` -> many use case:
  - define variable in an `cpp` file and use it in another `cpp` file. We cannot define global variable in header file, because it may redefinition error or undefined behavior
  - `extern "C"`

## What is an inline function?

- Function where the whole body is expanded at the line the function is called
- Reduce the function call overhead
- A Macro in C is simply text that is expanded before the compiler processes the source code
- `inline` is just a request to the compiler, it may be inlined or not

## What is a storage class?

- storage class is a specifier when we declaration a variable, together with scope, they will control two properties of the variable: its storage duration and its linkage:
  - `auto`:
  - `register`:
  - `static`:
  - `extern`:
  - `thread_local`:
  - `mutable`

## What is the role of mutable storage class specifier?

- Only member variables of class can be declare with `mutable`
- When a member variable is specified as `mutable`, it can be modify even if the object is declared as `const`

## Distinguish between shallow copy and deep copy?

- Shallow copy: create the bit-to-bit copy of object. If the object have a reference field like pointer, only the pointer is copy but not the content it point to.
- Deep copy: create the bit-to-bit copy of object. If the object have a reference field like pointer, both the pointer and the content it points to is copy.

## Function Overloading v.s. Function Overriding

- Function overloading: Multiple fu

## virtual & pure virtual function

- Virtual function: can be overrided by child classes
- Pure virtual function: like a interface, must be overrided by child classes 

## Abstract class and assignment

- Any class that have a pure virtual function is an abstract class
- We cannot create an object of abstract class type, so we must initialize it with an object of its subclass

## New & delete

## Reference variable

## References vs pointers

- From programmer point of view:
  - Pointers: variable that store an address of a object, and it occupy memory (64 bit).
  - Reference: an alias name of existing object.
- From compiler point of view:
  - Depend on the compiler, there is different implementations (ex. reference can be implement with `const` pointer)
  - Guarantee the semantic meaning of reference

## Static member variable & Static member functions

- Static member or function is shared among all objects of the classes
- We don't need to create an instance to create the static variable or function

## Name the data type which can be used to store wide characters in C++

- wchar_t
- char16_t
- char32_t

## Do we have a String primitive data type in C++?

- No, string is part of STL

## Un-buffered standard error stream (cerr) & Buffered standard error stream (clog)

- They both write to same stream (`stderr`)
- `cerr`: any output sent to stream is flushed immediately
- `clog`: output is buffered until the buffer is full or when `fflush` is called

## Destructor & Can it be overloaded?

- Destructor is called when the object is destroyed
- Each class can have only one destructor (no overloaded)

## Constructors & default Constructors & parameterized Constructors & copy constructor

- Default constructor: constructor with no parameter
- Parameterized constructor: constructor with a list of parameter that can be use to create the instance
- Copy constructor: constructor with parameter is another instance of the same type, it will create a copy of the instance pass to the constructor
- Move constructor:

## Constructor Overloading

- Same as above, we may have many constructor

## Difference between the keywords struct and class in C++

- In `struct`, default members access level is `public`, while in `class` the default access level of members is `private`

## Block scope variable

- Variable that only exist in the block scope
- It will hide the outer scope variable with same name.

## Command line arguments

## Can a program be compiled without main() function?

- It can be compiled but cannot be linked to create executable file

## Different ways of passing parameters to the functions

- Pass by value and pass by reference

## What is the full form of STL?

- Standard Template Library

## S++ or S = S+1, which can be recommended to increment the value by 1 and why?

- There is no different in modern compiler

## Actual and formal parameters



## Variable declaration and variable definition

- Variable declaration:
- Variable definition:

## Friend function

- Give access to protected members of a class

## This

- Use in class to get the address of current instance of the class

## Scope resolution operator

- The scope resolution operator :: is used to identify different variable or method from different scope.
- When there is variable with same name both inside and outside of a scope, the scope resolution operator can be use to access the variable outside of scope...
- It can also be used to access method and variable in a namespace, access static member of a class, define a class member outside of the class... 

## Class template

## Container class

## Token

## Virtual destructor

- When a class is a base class, the destructor should be virtual
- 