---
layout: post
title: "Graph basic algorithms"
date: 2020-06-15
tags: "algorithm C++"
---

In programming, graph is a concept that consist of `vertices` and `edges` between the vertexes. Usually, a graph with `N` vertices with labels from `0` to `N-1` can be represented with two data structure:

- Adjacency list: vertices are stored as objects and every vertex stores a list of its adjacent vertices. 
- Incidence matrix: a matrix `G` with `G[x][y]` indicates the connection between the vertices `x` and `y`.

A graph can be un-directed or directed, and un-weighted and weighted. A graph `G` is call un-directed if the edges in `G` is un-directed. If the edges have direction, we call G a directed graph. Similarly, a graph is un-weighted if all edges have a same weight and weighted if edges have different weights.

The basic operator on graph are from one vertex, we want to explore other vertices in the graph. This can be done with two basic algorithm: bread-first search and deep first search. In addition, the article will cover some other advanced topics: using DFS in decision tree problem, dijkstra & bellman-ford algorithm, minimum spanning tree problem, and directed acyclic graph with topological sorting problem.

> *Note:* The BFS and DFS section assume the most basic scenario: un-directed, and un-weighted graph

# Bread-first search - BFS

In BFS, we start from one vertex and visit all neighbors of that node first and repeat the procedure with neighbor vertices until all vertices are visited. This usually implemented with `queue`:

```cpp
/*
Input: 
  - graph as adjacent list G
  - source vertex x
*/
void bfs (vector<vector<int>>& G, int x) {
  const int n = G.size();
  queue<int> node;
  vector<int> visited(n);
  visited[x] = true;
  while (!q.empty()) {
    int k = q.size(); 
    for (int i = 0; i < k; ++i) {
      auto node = q.front();
      q.pop();
      // do job with node here
      for (auto &v : G[node]) {
        if (!visited[v]) {
          visited[v] = 1;
          q.push(v);
        }
      }
    }
  }
  return;
}
```

Note that in BFS, the closest vertices to the source are visited first, therefore, BFS can be used to find the shortest path between two vertices in un-weighted graph. In un-weighted graph, we have [Dijkstra algorithm](#dijkstra-algorithm), but the behind idea is very similar to BFS. The time complexity of `BFS` is `O(|V|+|E|)` and space complexity is `O(|V|)` with `V` is set of vertices and `E` is set of edges of the graph.

# Depth-first search - DFS 

In DFS, we start from one vertex and visit all vertices in one branch of this vertex first and repeat the procedure with other vertices until the graph is explored. We can implement DFS with recursive method or iterative method with stack:

```cpp
/*
Input: 
  - graph as adjacent list G
  - source vertex x
*/
void dfs(vector<vector<int>>& G, int x) {
  const int n = G.size();
  vector<int> visited(n);
  // recursive or iteratice
  dfs_recursive(G, visited, x);
  // dfs_iterative(G, visited, x);
}
void dfs_recursive(vector<vector<int>>& G, vector<int>& visited, int x) {
  if (visited[x]) return;
  visited[x] = 1;
  // do the job with x here
  for (auto &v : G[x]) {
    dfs(G, visited, v);
  }
}
void dfs_iterative(vector<vector<int>>& G, vector<int> &visited, int x) {
  stack<int> stk;
  stk.push(x);
  visited[x] = 1;
  while (!stk.empty()) {
    auto node = stk.top();
    stk.pop();
    // do the job here
    for (auto &v : G[node]) {
      if (!visited[v]) {
        visited[v] = 1;
        stk.push(v);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In DFS, we tend to move far as much as possible from the source vertex and only go back when we cannot go further, therefore, DFS is good when we need to find a specific vertex in a big graph. Though, both DFS and BFS can be use to discover all vertices of a graph with a same time complexity `O(|V|+|E|)` and space complexity `O(|V)`

# DFS for path-finding

When we have a decision tree, we usually want to go to leaf nodes of the tree and check what is the result of the decision we've made. We usually use DFS in this case, because we don't need to explicitly construct the graph. The most familiar problem to me is the subset problem: assume we have a set of `n` different items and we want to find a subset of `n` items that in oder to maximum some metric. In the worst case, we need to do brute-force to find all subset of the given set. We can do that with DFS:

```cpp
void dfs(vector<int> &items, int id, vector<int> &subset) {
  const int n = items.size();
  if (id >= n) return;
  for (int i = id; i < n; ++i) {
    // do include current id in our subset
    subset.push_back(items[i]);
    // calculate and update the metric with subset
    // explore other possibility when we do include items[i]
    dfs(items, i+1,subset);
    // backtrack, explore other possibility when we do NOT include items[i]
    subset.pop_back();
  }
}
```

The procedure is very similar to backtracking. As each item will have to state: in the subset or not, the complexity of the solution is `O(2^n)`, which is quite terrible. However, when `n` is small or we can early terminate a branch, we can apply this solution.

# Dijkstra algorithm

When working with graph, we usually need to find the shortest path from one source vertex to another vertex (or all vertices) in the graph. When the graph is un-weighted, we can use BFS, however we cannot do the same thing with weighted graphs. If we use DFS, we will come up with a solution with exponential (or even factorial) time complexity. Luckily, we have an efficient algorithm to do this: Dijkstra algorithm.

> *Note:* Dijkstra algorithm only works if we have no negative edges

The idea of Dijkstra algorithm is similar to BFS: we select the closest vertex to visit first. When using BFS, we push all the neighbors of the current vertex to a queue. Because the graph is un-weighted, the front of the queue is always the closest vertex to the source vertex. In weighted graph, we can do the same things, but now the front of the queue is not necessary the closest vertex, so we cannot pop from the queue in FIFO manner. In stead, we want the vertex at the top of the queue should have the smallest distance to the source vertex. This can be achieved with a `min heap`. Remind that heap is a data structure that help us to find the min or max of a ranges in `O(1)` with penalty on `Olog(N)` `insert` and `delete`. In C++, we already the heap: `priority_queue`. So we can implement Dijkstra similar to BFS with `priority_queue`:

```cpp
/*
Input: 
  - graph as adjacent list G
  - source vertex x
Output:
  - shortest paths from x to all vertices in G
  - predecessor nodes to reconstruct the paths
*/
const int INF = 1e9+7;
pair<vector<int>, vector<int>> dijkstra (vector<vector<pair<int,int>>>& G, int x) {
  const int n = G.size();
  vector<int> distance(n,INF);
  vector<int> pred(n,-1);
  priority_queue<pair<int,int>, vector<pair<int,int>>, greater<pair<int,int>>> pq;
  distance[x] = 0;
  pred[x] = x;
  pq.push({0,x});
  while (!pq.empty()) {
    auto [dist, node] = pq.top();
    pq.pop();
    if (dist != distance[node]) continue;
    for (auto &[id, w] : G[node]) {
      if (dist + w > distance[id]) {
        distance[id] = dist + w;
        pq.push({distance[id], id});
        pred[id] = node;
      }
    }
  }
  return {distance, pred};
}
```

The complexity of Dijkstra algorithm is `O((|V|+|E|)logV)`: similar to BFS, but now `push` to queue and `pop` from queue have `O(logV)` complexity. The Dijkstra will not work if there is a negative edges. You can imagine that if Dijkstra algorithm meets a negative edge, it will make the distance to two vertices of this edge become minus infinity by moving back and forth on the negative edges in an infinity loop.

# Bellman-Ford algorithm

As noted above, Dijkstra algorithm only works if we have no negative edge. The more general version of Dijkstra algorithm is Bellman-Ford algorithm that can work with negative edges (but no negative cycle). Both Dijkstra and Bellman-Ford algorithm works by relaxation, in which we approximate the minimum distance by assign them some initial values and replace them with the better values until they reach the optimal state. However, in Dijkstra algorithm, we use a priority queue to greedily choose from a set of candidates to relax the distance. Bellman, in other hand, simply relaxes all distance, and repeats it for `|V| - 1` times with `V` is the set of vertices. Bellman claims that by repeating the relaxation `k` times, we will found the shortest path to all vertices within `k` edges. The formal prove of the bellman force algorithm can be found [here](https://web.stanford.edu/class/archive/cs/cs161/cs161.1168/lecture14.pdf).  

In addition, Bellman-Ford algorithm can also detect the negative cycle in the graph. After relaxing `|V| - 1` times, we do an addition `|V|th` iteration. If there is some distance updated in this iteration, we can say that there are negative cycles in the graph. We can imagine that the graph have only `|V|` vertices, but there is shortest path with `|V|` edges (or `|V|+1` vertices). Therefore, the path with `|V|+1` vertices must have at least one repeated vertex, in other words, there are a cycle in the paths. If this path is the shortest path, if we cut the cycle out of the path we will have a longer path, which indicates the cycle must have negative weights!

```cpp
/*
Input: 
  - graph as adjacent list G and possible negative edges
  - source vertex x
Output:
  - vector of minimum distance from x to other vertices in the graph
  - predecessor nodes to reconstruct the paths
*/
const int INF = 1e9+7;
pair<vector<int>, vector<int>> bellman(vector<vector<pair<int,int>>>& G, int x) {
  const int n = G.size();
  vector<int> distance(n, INF);
  vector<int> pred(n,-1);
  distance[x] = 0;
  pred[x] = x;
  // construct the list of edges
  vector<tuple<int,int,int>> edges;
  for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
    for (auto &[id, w] : G[i]) {
      edges.push_back({i,id,w});
      edges.push_back({id,i,w});
    }
  }
  // repeat the relaxation n-1 times
  for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
    // update the weighs for all edges in list
    for (auto &[from, to, w] : edges) {
      if (distance[from] + w > distance[to]) {
        distance[to] = distance[from] + w;
        pred[to] = from;
      }
    }
  }
  // last iteration to check negative cycles
  for (auto &[from, to, w] : edges) {
    if (distance[from] + w > distance[to]) {
      throw std::logic_error("Graph have negative cycles");
    }
  }
  return {distance, pred};
}
```

# Minimum spanning tree (MST)

In a weighted graph, MST is the subset of edges that connect all vertices in the graph, without any cycles, and has minimum weight. In this article, we assume that the MST alway exists in the graph. There is two most popular algorithm to find the MST in the graph: Prim algorithm and Kruskal algorithm.

## Prim algorithm

Prim is a greedy algorithm. It maintain two set of vertices: the vertices that are in the spanning tree, and the vertices that are not. Starting with an empty spanning tree, at each step, it consider all edges that connect the two above sets and pick the edge with minimum weight and move the endpoint of this edges to the set contains MST. When implement prime algorithm, we only need to maintain one set that keeps track of vertices in the MST and stop the algorithm when the size of this set is equal to the size of the vertices set.

```cpp
/*

*/



```

## Kruskal algorithm

```cpp

```

# Acyclic directed graph and topological sort 

```cpp
std::vector<int> sort (std::vector<std::vector<int>>& G) {
  const int n = G.size();
  // in-degree[i]: number of edges that point to this vertex
  std::vector<int> in_degree(n,0);
  for (auto &v : G) {
    for (auto &node : v) {
      in_degree[node]++;
    }
  }
  std::vector<int> ret;
  // we will push all vertex with 0-indegree to this queue
  std::queue<int> q;
  for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
    if (in_degree[i] == 0) {
        q.push(i);
        ret.push_back(i);
    }
  }
  while (q.size()) {
    auto node = q.front();
    q.pop();
    for (auto &v : G[node]) {
      // remove node
      in_degree[v]--;
      // only push to queue if the node is zero-degree
      if (in_degree[v] == 0) {
        ret.push_back(v);
        q.push(v);
      }
    }
  }
  return ret;
}
```