---
layout: post
title: "Heaps"
date: 2020-07-30
tags: "algorithm C++ data-structure"
---

Heap is quite magical to me at first. Whenever I looking for some tutorial on heaps, I see something like a tree. But when I look at some implementation there is no tree, just array. I have been using `priority_queue` to solve problems and never mind the code behind. But I feel kinda uncomfortable tbh. So, I decide to settle down and write a heap. It turn out that when you start getting you hand dirty, it's much interesting than being obsessed every night without doing anything.

# Heaps

Most of time when we talk about heap, we implicitly mean *max heap* and binary heap *binary heap*. *Max heap* means the maximum value is always on the top, and *binary heap* means the underlying tree is a binary tree. For convinience I will just write heap in this article. Heap is a tree which have the following charatersitics:

- Each node have two children (binary tree - we will just write tree) 
- The value of root node is bigger than values of its children, this must hold for every node int the tree

Because its property, heap is usually a complete tree. A complete tree is a tree where: (1) all layer expect the last layers must be full and (2) if the last layer is not full, are nodes in this layer are as far left as possible. There are three most important operators on heaps:

- `push_heap(root, val)`: given a heap, adding value to the heap and build a new heap
- `heapify(root,val)`: given a heap, change the root of heap to `val` and build a new heap
- `make_heap(root)`: given a binary tree `root`, make the tree become a heap

## Push heap

The `push_heap` can be implement as follow:

- Add the new node to the tree; if the last layer is not full, add it after the last layer; if the last layer is full, create a new layer and add new node from left. 
- Compare the new node value with its parent; if it's bigger that its parent, swap the two nodes and do the same thing with the parent until we cannot do so or we reach the root

As the heap is alway a complete tree, its height is `logN`. When we do `push_heap`, the new element can only move from lower to higher layers, therefore, the complexity of `push_heap` in the worst case is `O(logN)`.

## Heapify 

The `heapify` is usually used when we extract the root elements from heap. We will replace the root with the last node in the tree and rebuild the heap on each layers. In addition, we can also build make the tree become heap by calling `heapify` on nodes of each layer bottom-up. The implementation of `heapify` is as follow:

- Compare the new root node to the value of its left and right nodes. 
- If it's bigger than both left and right nodes, we don't need to do anything
- If it's smaller than left or right nodes, swap root node with the bigger node
- Keep moving the root node down until we cannot do so, or we reach the last layer

In `heapify`, we only move root node from higher to lowers node, therefore, complexity of `heapify` is also `O(logN)`. 

## Make heap

As desribed above, we can implement `make_heap` by calling heapify on nodes of each layer bottom up. As the tree is complete, we can even ignore the bottom and only call `heapify` on the first half nodes of the tree. From the algorithm, we may think the complexity is `O(NlogN)`, but actually the complexity of `make_heap` is `O(N)`. The formal proof is here.

# Heaps implement with array

The good thing with complete tree is they can be represented as an array. If we use `0-index`, we can define a complete binary tree with an array `arr` by following conventions:

- For each `arr[i]`, its left node is `arr[2*i]` and its right node is `arr[2*i+2]`
- For each `arr[i]`, its parent node is `arr[(i-1)/2]`

With the aboves convention, the last node in the tree is the last of the array, and adding new nodes to the tree is simple as add new element to the array. This make the heap implementation become much easier. The following code implement `heapq` which behavior similar to `priority_queue` in STL.

```cpp
class heapq {
public:
    heapq() : sz(0) {}
    heapq(std::vector<int>& _arr) {
        arr = _arr;
        __make_heap();
        sz = arr.size();
    }
    heapq(std::vector<int>&& _arr) {
        arr = std::move(_arr);
        __make_heap();
        sz = arr.size();
    }
    void push(int val) {
        arr.push_back(val);
        int id = sz;
        while (1) {
            auto p = __parent(id);
            if (p < 0) break;
            if (arr[id] >= arr[p]) {
                std::swap(arr[id], arr[p]);
                id = p;
            }
            else {
                break;
            }
        }
        sz++;
    }
    int top() {
        return arr[0];
    }
    void pop() {
        int ret = arr[0];
        if (sz > 1) {
            arr[0]= arr.back();
            arr.pop_back();
        }
        sz--;
        __heapify(0);
    }
    bool isEmpty() {
        return sz == 0;
    }
    void printHeap() {
      for (auto & v : arr) {
        std::cout << v << " ";
      }
      std::cout << std::endl;
    }

private:
    std::vector<int> arr;
    int sz;
private:
    void __make_heap() {
        for (int i = arr.size() / 2; i>= 0; --i ) {
              std::cout << arr[i] << std::endl;
              printHeap();
            __heapify(i);
        }
    }
    void __heapify(int id) {
        int l = __left(id), r = __right(id);
        int max_id = id;
        // find the larest among id, it's left child and it's
        // right child
        if (l != -1 && arr[l] > arr[max_id]) {
            max_id = l;
        }
        if (r != -1 && arr[r] > arr[max_id]) {
            max_id = r;
        }
        if (max_id == id) {
            // the root is already the largest
            return;
        }
        else {
            // swap root with the maximum value
            std::swap(arr[id],arr[max_id]);
            // build max heap for the max_id
            __heapify(max_id);
        }
        
    }
    int __parent(int id) {
        if (id == 0) return -1; // root node is at 0
        else return (id-1)/2;
    }
    int __left(int id) {
        if (2*id + 1 >= arr.size()) return -1; // no left
        else return 2*id + 1;
    }
    int __right(int id) {
        if (2*id + 2 >= arr.size()) return -1; // no left
        else return 2*id + 2;
    }
};
```